this video is sponsored by polygon a
library of textures and models for
professional 3d artists click the link
in the description to learn more
all right
enough fooling around with flaming
monkey heads let's start making that
donut so i've got a brand new scene open
in blender so clear whatever you did in
the last video
um and what i'm going to do is delete
the default cube just by hitting delete
and i'm going to replace it by hitting
shift a remember to add a new object and
then underneath mesh we've got the
base meshes that you can start with so
you want to start with something that
looks closest to what you want to create
which in this case is a donut
so
this one this one is the closest match a
taurus
so
when you click the taurus you can see
you get this
and it's okay but
it looks a little thin it's a little bit
weak for a donut thankfully though in
the bottom left-hand corner you'll see a
box and if you click the box you can see
you get settings and this is going to
change the look of the taurus now by the
way if you don't see the box it's
because you accidentally performed an
action after you added the taurus so if
i was to for example click on the donut
even though it's already selected it's
gone and i can't get those settings back
there so
some actions in blender you will get
options immediately after you perform an
action but if you do another action it
clears it and you don't have those
options anymore
anyway so uh with these options here you
can see i could change the resolution of
the donut and down here underneath major
radius i could change the size of it
how thick or how fat the doughnut is
so speaking of the radius and the size
it's a good idea when you're building
something in blender to start with the
correct real world scale
so this major radius here is saying that
this is 0.4 meters the radius so our
diameter is double that which means that
this is currently
an 80 centimeter doughnut which is
almost half me
it's a big donut very big by the way if
you are american and you would like to
use a different unit system you can do
it over here in the properties
underneath units you can change your
unit system to imperial and then it will
use feet and inches and
penny farthings or what other crazy
crazy units you guys have come up with
you can use that if you want but for the
tutorial i'm going to stick to metric so
this this size here um
we want it to match the real world so
the research that i did says that most
donuts are about 10 centimeters right
like about that
that
big right so a radius is
half of that so therefore this should be
five centimeters so if i just typed in
here five
centimeters
we would get the correct thing which is
point zero five meters and then if i
adjusted my
minor radius
um
i mean there's obviously no measurement
for this but like
you know how fat the doughnut is is
totally up to you if you want to look
like chubby you can you know go like
that but i don't know i think something
around like point two
eight
i think that looks pretty good maybe
0.26 i think that's what i used
previously times the times that i did it
but anyways like that there we go that's
the one that's the size i'm going to use
and then the other thing is the
resolution the resolution of our donut
now you might think that you would want
to use as high resolution as possible
right
because i remember i did that when i was
starting out with blender every new
object i added i used the most
vertices i could
most highest resolution
not realizing that actually what you
want to use is the lowest resolution and
then use a sub surf modifier which we'll
get to next to smooth it out because
then you've got
less vertices to work with it's easier
to work with a lower res mesh than a
high res anyway point is
is we want to set this to something low
but something that will at least have
the correct overall shape that we want
so
um you know something like
this um
and also i want to keep the um the size
of these faces i want to keep them close
to square like as square as possible i
want to say
um and you're not to know it because you
know you're just starting out but the
reason for this is later on down the
road we're going to use displacements
and it's much better if you've got
square faces for displacements so anyway
something like that
is pretty good so these are the settings
i'm going to use you have a second to
use it
and we're done okay that's it
we have the donut ready to go
so we've added an object
but let's say you want to change the
shape of that object because
that's very common thing you want to do
when you're building 3d creations is you
want to tweak it to look how how you
want it so right now this is
the most perfect
donut that ever existed in the history
of the world you could have the like a
doughnut competition and no one would
ever be able to make as perfectly round
and smooth shape as this right because
computers make things that are perfect
and in the real world they're not so
that's why imperfection is the virtual
perfection which is a quote by
someone but it's very true
i don't know who said it but it's very
true
so what we want to do is make it look a
little bit lumpy a little bit misshapen
so to do that we need to enter into edit
mode so if you go to the top corner top
left corner you can see we are in object
mode and if you change that to edit mode
you will see that we get this which
makes it look like a grid like a cage
has appeared over it
or the hotkey for this is tab
because this is a very common action to
switch between object mode and edit mode
is tab
by the way when you are in edit mode the
only thing you can do the only thing you
can click on is within the object itself
like if i'm in edit mode on that and i
try to click on the lamp or the camera
you can see nothing happens the only
thing i can click on is the object
itself so just something to keep a note
of
so while in edit mode you can see that
now that i'm clicking around
i can click on these little dots here
and each of these dots basically is the
shape of the donut as you can probably
guess right
and if i use the same hotkeys that you
remembered from the last one g to grab
if i was to g and grab this up you could
see that i would make a spike in my
donut there now i don't want just one
singular spike because that would be
horrible and i also don't want to like
if i want to make this donut look lumpy
i don't want to go like this one and
then this one and then this like that's
a lot that's a lot of work and it's not
even going to look very good what i want
to do instead is i want to like grab one
and then like have it affect the
vertices around it so there's a tool for
that and it's proportional editing so at
the top of the screen there there's a
little button or the hotkey for that is
o to turn that on and off
and then when i do that if i use the
same shortcut g to move this one vertice
you'll see that now as i move it the
rest of the donut comes with it
but it only looks like the whole donut
is coming with it if i was to scroll up
like scroll
on my uh on my mouse right now
just scroll up or down until you can
actually see uh
what's this little circle appear around
so if you scroll up it'll get smaller so
anyways if i do this you can see that i
can affect the area of vertices around
it right
so what i want to do is just make i want
to make it look lumpy so around that
sort of area and i'm going to hit z
because i'm moving it and i want to move
it along the z axis so it's just going
up
and now you can see i've got part of the
donut which is a little bit lumpy
that's actually probably a little bit
too lumpy
so let me just undo that and let's try
it again
move it up oh come on it's cleared my
thing because i undid it anyway so
something like just a little bit lumpy
and then i'm going to grab like this one
here and i'm going to move that down a
little bit
so now i've got a weird little uh
lumpy bit of donut and then i'm just
going to like mis-shape the rest of it
right because no donut no donut is
perfect although they do dry
um just make it look a little bit
squishy because otherwise it's going to
look like a
like a
i don't know like at a water park right
those little inflatable rings that you
get
i'll never forget as a kid we go to the
water park a lot
and uh
yeah there was like this this ride
called the calypso bay at wet and wild
australia
and uh i used to love like stacking the
rings on top of each other
and uh they kicked me out of the pool
they had the tomato
because you're not allowed to stack the
rings but it was so fun i wanted to
stack them up and then be inside it and
like roll around but the lifeguards who
have nothing better to do
told me to get out of the pool anyway
uh so as you can see i'm just grabbing
parts of the mesh and i'm just moving it
you don't have to copy my exact motions
as i'm doing this just so you know just
make your own misshapen donut don't copy
mine
follow your instincts
make your own lumpy looking thing just
by clicking
g
etc anyways like that look at that
horrible weird misshapen looking donut
that's what you want you don't want a
perfect looking donut you want something
that looks weird
so well done you've made something weird
now you're probably thinking cool but
can we please get rid of the jagged look
because it looks like you would cut your
finger running across this donut it's
too jagged so
if you are in object mode which is
important you have to be in object mode
and you were to right click your mesh
you have these settings and at the top
there you've got two settings which are
very common shade smooth or shade flat
so we're going to use smooth so flat is
used for things like buildings flat
planes things like that and smooth is
for organic shapes like this one and
it's going to basically
where there's two faces it's going to
try to smooth them um yeah basically
it'll try and make it look smooth now
you'll notice it does look smooth but
the edges of it
you can see it does still look sharp so
shade smooth is just like a
it's changing the way it looks but it's
not actually affecting the actual shape
of it in any way so if you want to
actually make this higher res what you
need to do is use a sub surf modifier so
the modifiers are found in the
properties so this is the properties
here by the way we haven't really talked
that much about properties but it's this
whole section on the right here so if
you click on the
wrench
spanner
i
always get them confused you can tell
i've never got my hands dirty i'm gonna
go with spanner and this is the modifier
panel okay so it's empty right now but
if you click on add modifier you get
this
lovely list
and the one we are looking for is right
down here where it says subdivision
subsurf and it's probably the most
common
mod or like effect that's used across
all 3d software what it does is it
smooths out the mesh right
and as a modifier so what's good about
modifiers is that it is what's called
non-destructive meaning that it's not
applied like i can work on other parts
of the scene and then i can come back to
the donor and go like i want it to be
smoother and then i can change the
smoothness and then i can come back to
it later and go it's too smooth i want
to change it again so you're not
actually like nothing is being applied
it's just it's all the settings are kept
there so that you can come back and
change them as you need to so modifiers
are fantastic
so what this subsurf modifier is doing
is basically
if you look at the each of these faces
here so this is what's called a face
and it's a
like
when you've got three or more vertices
and you add a solid face
between them that's a face i don't know
how to explain it
but a sub surf modifier what it's doing
is it's adding like another grid between
it and it's taking like the average
shapes of it so like on the edge there
like where it was uh previously like
sharp it's it's added it's doubled the
resolution and it's averaged it out to
try to smooth it um so what you're
looking at is one subdivision because
that's the viewport setting the render
setting is what will it will render at
right so when you actually when we get
to that stage that's the setting it's
going to use so if i was to increase
viewport it's doing another subdivision
over that if i was to increase it again
it would make it even smoother and
smoother and smoother you don't want to
go too high though because the higher
you go the more graphics is going to be
used to render it in your viewport or
when you do your actual render so keep
it low but one is fine for this
okay so well done um all we've got is a
lumpy donut and uh yeah yeah we did we
did we did make a long video so go ahead
and join me in the next video and we're
gonna make the icing for our lumpy
doughnut